We are just hours away from the opportunity of a lifetime: the opportunity to get our country out of the European Union and in doing so get our borders back, our democracy back and for us to embark upon an exciting future as an independent nation. 
That’s what happens if we leave the European Union. We will exit a failed political union, one which is now a disaster zone. We see a migrant crisis utterly out of control. We see a eurozone crisis causing human misery on a shocking scale.
And we see an outdated organisation that has no answers when it comes to many of the problems in the modern world. I’ve heard a lot through the course of this campaign from the wealthy establishment about GDP. About maintaining the status quo. 
Well that might be all right for them with cheaper nannies and chauffeurs but it isn’t what’s in the best interests of ordinary British workers. Open-door migration has suppressed wages in the unskilled labour market, meant that living standards have fallen and that life has become a lot tougher for so many in our country. 
We must leave the European Union so that not only can wages increase for British workers but so that living standards rather than declining can start going up. The wellbeing of those living and working in our country matters to me more than GDP figures. 
The EU’s open borders make us less safe. As a bureaucratic club it makes us poorer. Membership of this union stops us acting in our own national interest, forcing us to be represented by unelected old men in Brussels. 
So we must seize this chance. It is unlikely to ever come again. Before making this historic decision I want those in our country to fully examine just what the consequences would be of a Remain vote. 
We know that the European Union is hell bent on further, deeper centralisation. Indeed the plans for a full EU army have been put on ice only until the very day after the referendum. 
It is clear that the EU nationalists are biding their time, waiting for a Remain vote before they hike up the EU’s budget that we will have to contribute more towards and they will also reveal their full military ambitions. 
Most importantly of all though the British people must seriously consider what this European Union will look like in 10 years. Because remaining inside won’t just mean open borders with the likes of Poland and Romania. It will mean far more than that. 
A few days after the EU referendum it’s the 100th anniversary of the Battle of the Somme. We should never forget just how much generations have sacrificed. 
Our democracy is precious and our right to self-determination is one which has been given away by the political class to the EU and bureuacrats such as Jean-Claude Juncker. 
We must seize this chance, this opportunity to take it back. After all, what sort of future do we wish to leave our children and grandchildren? 
To have a democratic Britain able to make the big decisions in our own Parliament is of huge importance. David Cameron is one of the biggest cheerleaders in the whole of Europe for full Turkish membership of the EU. 
He has a long track record on this. The way he has shamefully sought to trick the British people into thinking that this isn’t an issue says a lot about how honest he is being. Just look at what he has said and done in the past. 
Consider this: in 2010 David Cameron said he strongly supported full EU membership for Turkey. He even proclaimed that he wanted to pave the road from Ankara to Brussels and that he was angry at the lack of progress in Turkey joining at that time. 
In late 2014 Mr Cameron said that the EU was weaker because it didn’t have Turkey in it and that he still very much supported membership for Turkey. The British embassy in Ankara boasts on their website of working on Turkey’s bid to join and we know that there is a dedicated team working to improve Turkey’s prospects of joining the EU. 
To top it all we are also handing over more than £1billion to Turkey and other countries in what is classed as “pre-accession funding”: essentially, money the EU forces us to hand over to prepare these countries for full membership. Other countries being funded include Albania and Serbia. 
This year will see Turkey, supported by David Cameron and Angela Merkel, gain full visa-free access to Europe, effectively moving the Syrian border to Calais. So when we look at all of the evidence and David Cameron’s strong long-term support for Turkish membership, there is no doubt in my mind that if we Remain inside the EU that Turkey will have joined by 2025. 
That would be completely wrong for our country, which already has an infrastructure at breaking point. Just think what that would mean: net migration would be even higher, perhaps up to 400,000 net per year or even half a million each year. 
A future inside the European Union would mean our population rising even faster at a completely out-of-control and irresponsible rate. This European Union is not one which is standing still. It is expanding in powers, expanding in size and determined to become a United States of Europe.
If we Remain our country will never be the same again. Our public services will be pushed to the point of failure and our national security will be greatly weakened as EU open borders expand further still. 
This is a once-in-a-lifetime moment. I believe in this country and its people. We are good enough to thrive on the world stage representing ourselves, our interests and our beliefs as a self-governing nation. 
On Thursday we must have the courage to exit the failed EU project and ensure a safer, more prosperous future with us in control of our country’s destiny. Together let’s make June 23 our Independence Day.